साल्वो भैष्मीविवाहे यदुबलविजितश्चन्द्रचूडाद्विमानं
विन्दन् सौभं स मायी त्वयि वसति कुरुंस्त्वत्पुरीमभ्यभाङ्क्षीत् ।
प्रद्युम्नस्तं निरुन्धन्निखिलयदुभटैर्न्यग्रहीदुग्रवीर्यं
तस्यामात्यं द्युमन्तं व्यजनि च समर: सप्तविंशत्यहान्त: ॥१॥
साल्व: भैष्मी-विवाहे	Saalva, in Rukmini's wedding
यदु-बल-विजित:-	by the Yaadava army conquered
चन्द्रचूडात्-विमानं	from Shankara the aerial car
विन्दन् सौभं	getting the Saubha
स मायी त्वयि	that elusive one, when Thou
वसति कुरून्-	were in Kuru's city (Indraprastha)
त्वत्-पुरीम्-अभ्यभाङ्क्षीत्	Thy city (Dwaarikaa) attacked
प्रद्युम्न:-तं	Pradyumna, him
निरुन्धन्-	resisting
निखिल-यदु-भटै:-	with the entire Yadu army
न्यग्रहीत्-उग्र-वीर्यं	killed very powerful
तस्य-आमात्यं द्युमन्तं	his minister Dyumanta
व्यजनि च समर:	and the battle lasted
सप्त-विंशति-अहान्त:	twenty seven days
Saalva of magical merits, who was defeated by the Yaadava army at the time of Rukmini's abduction, got Saubh the aerial car as a boon from Shivaa.When Thou were residing in the city of the Kurus, Indraprastha, Saalva attacked Thy city Dwaarika. Pradyumna resisted him heading the entire army of the Yaadavas, and killed his powerful minister Dyumanta. This battle lasted for 27 days.
तावत्त्वं रामशाली त्वरितमुपगत: खण्डितप्रायसैन्यं
सौभेशं तं न्यरुन्धा: स च किल गदया शार्ङ्गमभ्रंशयत्ते ।
मायातातं व्यहिंसीदपि तव पुरतस्तत्त्वयापि क्षणार्धं
नाज्ञायीत्याहुरेके तदिदमवमतं व्यास एव न्यषेधीत् ॥२॥
तावत्-त्वम् रामशाली	then Thou with Balaraam
त्वरितम्-उपगत:	quickly reaching
खण्डित-प्राय-सैन्यं	almost destroying army
सौभेशं तं न्यरुन्धा:	the owner of Saubh, him, confronted
स च किल गदया	and he indeed with his mace
शार्ङ्गम्-अभ्रंशयत्-ते	Sharanga knocked down, Thine
माया-तातं	created by magic, father
व्यहिंसीत्-अपि	killed also
तव-पुरत:-तत्-त्वया-अपि	in front of Thee, that by Thee also
क्षणार्धं न-अज्ञायि-इति	for a second was not understood
आहु:-एके तत्-इदम्-अवयतं	say some that, this difference of opinion
व्यास एव न्यषेधीत्	Vyaas himself refuted
Along with Balaraam Thou quickly reached Dwaarika and confronted Saalva the owner of the aerial car Saubha whose army was almost destroyed. He knocked down Thy bow Shaaranga with a stroke of his mace. He even killed the likeness of Thy father which he had created by his magical abilities. Some say that even Thou were for a moment deceived by this illusion. But sage Vyaas has refuted this opinion.
क्षिप्त्वा सौभं गदाचूर्णितमुदकनिधौ मङ्क्षु साल्वेऽपि चक्रे-
णोत्कृत्ते दन्तवक्त्र: प्रसभमभिपतन्नभ्यमुञ्चद्गदां ते ।
कौमोदक्या हतोऽसावपि सुकृतनिधिश्चैद्यवत्प्रापदैक्यं
सर्वेषामेष पूर्वं त्वयि धृतमनसां मोक्षणार्थोऽवतार: ॥३॥
क्षिप्त्वा सौभं	throwing Saubha
गदा-चूर्णितम्-	by the mace smashed to powder
उदकनिधौ मङ्क्षु	in the ocean, immediately
साल्वे-अपि-चक्रेण-	(when) Saalva also by (Sudarshana discus)
उत्कृत्ते दन्तवक्त्र:	was cut off, Dantavaktra
प्रसभम्-अभिपतन्-	violently attacking
अभ्यमुञ्चत्-गदां ते	hitting with the mace, Thee
क्मोदक्या	by Kaumudaki
हत:-असौ-अपि	killed he also
सुकृति-निधि:-	the good deeds repository
चैद्य-वत्-प्रापत्--ऐक्यं	like Chedi attained union
सर्वेषाम्-एष	for all, this
पूर्वं त्वयि धृत-मनसां	from long in Thee had fixed their minds
मोक्षण-अर्थ:-अवतार:	to liberate was the purpose of the incarnation.
The aerial car Saubha was smashed to pieces with a mace and thrown into the sea, Saalva's head was also cut off by Thy Sudershana discus. Dantavaktra then attacked Thee violently and hit Thee with his mace, thereupon Thou killed him, the repository of good deeds, with Thy mace Kaumodaki. He was fortunate like Shishupal (Chedi) and others who had attained union with Thee. The purpose of this incarnation of Thee was to give liberation to all those who had for long fixed their minds on Thee.
त्वय्यायातेऽथ जाते किल कुरुसदसि द्यूतके संयताया:
क्रन्दन्त्या याज्ञसेन्या: सकरुणमकृथाश्चेलमालामनन्ताम् ।
अन्नान्तप्राप्तशर्वांशजमुनिचकितद्रौपदीचिन्तितोऽथ
प्राप्त: शाकान्नमश्नन् मुनिगणमकृथास्तृप्तिमन्तं वनान्ते ॥४॥
त्वयि-आयाते-अथ	(when) Thou went back (to Dwaarika)
जाते किल कुरुसदसि	took place indeed (then) in the Kuru assembly
द्यूतके संयताया:	in the (fraudulent) game of dice was dragged
क्रन्दन्त्या याज्ञसेन्या:	crying Draupadi
सकरुणम्-अकृथा:-	piteously, Thou did
चेल-मालाम्-अनन्ताम्	her clothing of length endless
अन्न-अन्त-प्राप्त-	(after) the food was over, arriving
शर्वांशज-मुनि-	by a part of Shankara (born), Muni (Durwaasaa)
चकित्-द्रौपदी-	by frightened Draupadi
चिन्तित:-अथ प्राप्त:	being thought of Thee, then, reaching there
शाक-अन्नम्-अश्नन्	some leafy vegetable (left over) eating
मुनिगणम्-अकृथा:-	the sage and his men made
त्प्तिम्-अन्तम् वनान्ते	satiated fully, in the end of the forest.
After Thy return to Dwaarikaa, a fraudulent game of dice took place in the assembly of the Kurus. Draupadi was dragged there by her hair. Piteously and helplessly crying she prayed to Thee. With compassion Thou endowed her with endless length of clothing. Further, when living in the forest, Draupadi was very frightened because sage Durvaasaa had come there with his people when the food was over. Draupadi again thought of Thee and Thou came to her rescue and ate a bit of the left over leafy vegetable and thereby satiated fully the hunger of the sage and his retinue.
युद्धोद्योगेऽथ मन्त्रे मिलति सति वृत: फल्गुनेन त्वमेक:
कौरव्ये दत्तसैन्य: करिपुरमगमो दूत्यकृत् पाण्डवार्थम् ।
भीष्मद्रोणादिमान्ये तव खलु वचने धिक्कृते कौरवेण
व्यावृण्वन् विश्वरूपं मुनिसदसि पुरीं क्षोभयित्वागतोऽभू: ॥५॥
युद्ध-उद्योगे-अथ	for the war preparations, then
मन्त्रे मिलति सति	strategies were being made
वृत: फल्गुनेन त्वम्-एक:	desired by Arjun Thou alone
कौरव्ये दत्त-सैन्य:	to Duryodhana gave the army
करिपुरम्-अगम:	to Hastinaapur went
दूत्य-कृत् पाण्डव-अर्थम्	in the role of a messenger for the Paandavas
भीष्म-द्रोण-आदि-मान्ये	by Bhishma Drona and others (Thou) being honoured
तव खलु वचने	(by) Thy indeed by words
धिक्कृते कौरवेण	rejected by Duryodhana
व्यावृण्वन् विश्वरूपं	revealing the Cosmic form
मुनि-सदसि	in the sage's assembly
पुरीं क्षोभयित्वा-	the city shaking went away
गत:-अभू:	having, went away.
As the preparations of the war were on and strategies were decided, Arjuna asked Thee alone to be on his side. Agreeing to that, Thou gave Thy army to Duryodhana. Taking on the role of a messenger of the Pandavas, Thou went to Hastinaapur. Indeed Thy words were honoured by Bhishma, Drona and others but Duryodhana rejected them altogether. Revealing Thy Cosmic form in the assembly of the sages Thou shook up the entire Hastinaapur and returned to Dwaarikaa.
जिष्णोस्त्वं कृष्ण सूत: खलु समरमुखे बन्धुघाते दयालुं
खिन्नं तं वीक्ष्य वीरं किमिदमयि सखे नित्य एकोऽयमात्मा ।
को वध्य: कोऽत्र हन्ता तदिह वधभियं प्रोज्झ्य मय्यर्पितात्मा
धर्म्यं युद्धं चरेति प्रकृतिमनयथा दर्शयन् विश्वरूपम् ॥६॥
जिष्णो:-त्वं	of Arjun Thou
कृष्ण सूत: खलु	O Krishna! Charioteer indeed
समर-मुखे	in the face of the battle
बन्धु-घाते दयालुं	in the relations' killing pitiful
खिन्नं तं वीक्ष्य वीरं	saddened him, seeing that warrior
किम्-इदम्-अयि सखे	what is this O friend!
नित्य:-एक:-अयम्-आत्मा	eternal and one this Aatmaa (self) is
क: वध्य:	who is the slain
क:-अत्र हन्ता	who here is the slayer
तत्-इह	so here
वध-भियं प्रोज्झ्य	the killing fear giving up
मयि-अर्पित-आत्मा	in me surrendering yourself
धर्म्यम् युद्धं चर-इति	the righteous war carry out
प्रकृतिम्-अनयथा:	to a balanced state of mind (thus) brought (him)
दर्शयन् विश्वरूपम्	showing the cosmic form.
In Thy role as Arjuna's charioteer, Thou saw the warrior sad and dejected in the face of the war, with the pitiful thought of having to kill his relations and his own people. Thou said to him 'O Friend! What is this? Aatman is eternal and only one. Who is the slain and who is the slayer here? Therefore giving up all fear of killing, surrender yourself to Me and carry out this righteous war.' By saying so and showing him Thy cosmic form, Thou brought Arjuna back to a balanced state of mind.
भक्तोत्तंसेऽथ भीष्मे तव धरणिभरक्षेपकृत्यैकसक्ते
नित्यं नित्यं विभिन्दत्ययुतसमधिकं प्राप्तसादे च पार्थे ।
निश्शस्त्रत्वप्रतिज्ञां विजहदरिवरं धारयन् क्रोधशाली-
वाधावन् प्राञ्जलिं तं नतशिरसमथो वीक्ष्य मोदादपागा: ॥७॥
भक्त-उत्तंसे-अथ भीष्मे	the leading devotee, then, Bheeshma
तव धरणि-भर-क्षेप-	Thy (purpose of) the earth's burden reducing
कृत्ये-एक-सक्ते	in fulfilling alone engaged
नित्यं नित्यं विभिन्दति-	everyday destroying
अयुत-सम-अधिकं	ten thousand about or more
प्राप्त-सादे च पार्थे	and coming to exhaustion of Arjuna,
निश्शस्त्रत्व-प्रतिज्ञां	not taking up arms, the vow
विजहत्-अरिवरं	discarding, the great discus
धारयन् क्रोधशाली-	holding, in anger
इव-अधावन्	as if running
प्राञ्जलिं तं	with joined hands him
नतशिरसम्-अथ	(and) bowed head then
वीक्ष्य मोदात्-अपागा:	seeing, with joy were full.
Bhishma, one of the leading devotees was intent on helping in fulfilling Thy purpose of reducing the burden of the earth, and was killing almost 10,000 warriors everyday. Arjuna had become very exhausted in resisting Bheeshma. Forgetting Thy vow of not taking up arms in the war, Thou rushed towards Bheeshma with Thy great discus in hand as though in great anger. Bheeshma stood with folded hands and bent down his head as Thou approached him. Seeing him thus Thou were full of joy and desisted from attacking him.
युद्धे द्रोणस्य हस्तिस्थिररणभगदत्तेरितं वैष्णवास्त्रं
वक्षस्याधत्त चक्रस्थगितरविमहा: प्रार्दयत्सिन्धुराजम् ।
नागास्त्रे कर्णमुक्ते क्षितिमवनमयन् केवलं कृत्तमौलिं
तत्रे त्रापि पार्थं किमिव नहि भवान् पाण्डवानामकार्षीत् ॥८॥
युद्धे द्रोणस्य	in the fight with Drona
हस्ति-स्थिर-	on an elephant firmly seated
रण-भगदत्त-ईरितं	the fighting Bhagadatta discharged
वैष्णव-अस्त्रं	the Vaishnava (Naaraayana) missile
वक्षसि-आधत्त	on (Thy) chest took
चक्र-स्थगित-	in (Thy) Sudarshana discus hiding
रवि-महा:	the sun's rays
प्रार्दयत्-सिन्धुराजं	got killed Jayadratha
नाग-अस्त्रे कर्ण-मुक्ते	the Naaga missile discharged by Karna
क्षितिम्-अवनमयन्	the earth, by lowering it down
केवलं कृत्त-मौलिं	only was cut off the crown
तत्रे तत्र-अपि पार्थं	saved there also was Arjuna
किम्-इव नहि भवान्	what all did not Thou
पाण्डवानाम्-अकार्षीत्	of the Pandavas, do good
When the fight with Drona was going on Bhagadatta who was firmly seated on an elephant discharged the Vaishnava missile which Thou attracted towards Thy own chest and saved Arjuna. Arjuna was able to kill Jayadratha when Thy Sudarshana discus hid the rays of the sun. Again when Karna discharged the Naaga missile towards Arjuna, Thou lowered the earth by the pressure of Thy toe, so that only Arjun's crown got cut off and Arjuna was saved here also. What all did Thou not do for the benefit of the Paandavas.
युद्धादौ तीर्थगामी स खलु हलधरो नैमिशक्षेत्रमृच्छ-
न्नप्रत्युत्थायिसूतक्षयकृदथ सुतं तत्पदे कल्पयित्वा ।
यज्ञघ्नं वल्कलं पर्वणि परिदलयन् स्नाततीर्थो रणान्ते
सम्प्राप्तो भीमदुर्योधनरणमशमं वीक्ष्य यात: पुरीं ते ॥९॥
युद्ध-आदौ तीर्थ-गामी	at the beginning of the battle, going for pilgrimage
स खलु हलधर:	that indeed Balaraama
नैमिश-क्षेत्रम्-ऋच्छन्-	the Naimishyaaranya area covering
अप्रत्युत्थायि-सूत-	who had not stood up in respect, that Suta
क्षय-कृत्-अथ	killing then
सुतं तत्-पदे	his son on his seat
कल्पयित्वा	installing
यज्ञघ्नं वल्कलं	the destroyer of the Yangyas, Valkala (an Asura)
पर्वणि परिदलयन्	during the full moon and new moon days, killing
स्नात-तीर्थ:	completing the pilgrimage
रण-अन्ते सम्प्राप्त:	towards the end of the war returning
भीम-दुर्योधन-रणम्-	the Bheema and Duryodhana fight
अशमं वीक्ष्य यात:	prolonged, seeing
पुरीं ते	to city, Thine.
Just when the war was to begin Balaraama had gone away on a pilgrimage. He first covered the holy area of Naimishaaranya. Then he killed Suta for not having got up to honour him and installed his son in his place. Then he destroyed the Asura Valkala, who used to destroy the Yagnyas carried out on the full moon and new moon days. Completing his pilgrimage he returned to Kurukshetra. There when he saw the prolonged fight between Bheema and Duryodhana, he went away to Thy city of Dwaarika.
संसुप्तद्रौपदेयक्षपणहतधियं द्रौणिमेत्य त्वदुक्त्या
तन्मुक्तं ब्राह्ममस्त्रं समहृत विजयो मौलिरत्नं च जह्रे ।
उच्छित्यै पाण्डवानां पुनरपि च विशत्युत्तरागर्भमस्त्रे
रक्षन्नङ्गुष्ठमात्र: किल जठरमगाश्चक्रपाणिर्विभो त्वम् ॥१०॥
संसुप्त-द्रौपदेय	deep in sleep, the sons of Draupadi
क्षपण-हत-धियं	having killed, the evil minded
द्रौणिम्-एत्य	Drona's son (Ashwatthaamaa) approaching
त्वत्-उक्त्या	by Thy saying
तत्-मुक्तं ब्राह्मम्-अस्त्रं	discharged by him the Brahamaastra
समहृत विजय:	retracted Arjuna
मौलिरत्नम् च जह्रे	and clipped off his crest jewel
उच्छितै पाण्डवानां	to cut off the line of Paandavas
पुन;-अपि च	and again also
विशति-उत्तरा-गर्भम्-	entering Uttaaraa's womb
अस्त्रे रक्षन्-	by the weapon protecting
अङ्गुष्ठ-मात्र: किल	thumb sized merely indeed
जठरम्-अगा:-	in her womb Thou went
चक्रपाणि:-विभो त्वम्	discus in hand, All Mighty! Thou.
Drona's son, the evil minded Ashwatthaamaa had killed the sons of Draupadi when they were fast asleep. On Thy command Arjuna approached him and retracted the Brahmaastra discharged by him and clipped off his crest jewel.To cut off the line of the Paandavas, Ashwatthaamaa again sent the weapon into Uttara's womb to kill the foetus in there. To protect the foetus Thou entered her womb in the size of a thumb with Thy Sudarshana discus in hand.
धर्मौघं धर्मसूनोरभिदधदखिलं छन्दमृत्युस्स भीष्म-
स्त्वां पश्यन् भक्तिभूम्नैव हि सपदि ययौ निष्कलब्रह्मभूयम् ।
संयाज्याथाश्वमेधैस्त्रिभिरतिमहितैर्धर्मजं पूर्णकामं
स्म्प्राप्तो द्वरकां त्वं पवनपुरपते पाहि मां सर्वरोगात् ॥११॥
धर्मौघं धर्मसूनो:-	the great Dharmas to Yudhishthira
अभिदधत्-अखिलं	teaching in totality
छन्द-मृत्यु:-स भीष्म:-	moment of death, who could decide, he BheeShma
त्वां पश्यन्	Thee seeing
भक्ति-भूम्ना-एव हि	by the devotional intensity alone
सपदि ययौ	soon attained
निष्कल-ब्रह्म-भूयम्	to indivisible Brahma state
संयाज्य-अथ-	accomplishing then
अश्व-मेधै:-त्रिभि:-	Ashwamedha three
अति-महितै:-	very great Yangysa
धर्मजं पूर्णकामं	Yudhishthira was fulfilled of aspirations
सम्प्राप्त: द्वारकां त्वं	returned to Dwaarikaa Thou
पवनपुरपते	O Lord of Guruvaayur!
पाहि मां सर्वरोगात्	save me from all diseases
The entire great Dharmas were taught to Yudhishthira by Bheeshma who could decide the moment of his death. On seeing Thee, by his devotional intensity alone he attained the indivisible state of Brahman. Thou enabled Yudhishthira to perform three great Ashwamedha Yangyas by which all his aspirations were fulfilled. Then Thou returned to Dwaarikaa. O Lord of Guruvaayur! save me from all diseases.